IT'S EASY TO KNOW WHAT YOU
DON'T WANT IN A CAREER.
I DON'T WANT TO
WORK FOR A COMPANY
THAT I DON'T
BELIEVE IN.
WORKING IN AN OFFICE,
CRUNCHING
MEANINGLESS DATA.
CLOCKING IN, SITTING
IN A LITTLE CUBICLE.
BUT FIGURING OUT WHAT YOU
DO WANT CAN BE HARDER.
I'D LIKE SOMETHING WHERE
I COULD TRAVEL A LOT.
A CAREER THAT HELPS
PEOPLE BUT MAKES ENOUGH
FOR ME TO LIVE
COMFORTABLY.
I WANT TO
BE SIGNIFICANT,
AND I WANT TO
MAKE A DIFFERENCE.
WHAT YOU MAY
BE LOOKING FOR
IS A CAREER IN SCIENCE.
*
WHY WOULD ANYONE FLY
INTO THE EYE OF A STORM?
CAN YOU ACTUALLY
LIVE AT THE BASE
OF AN ACTIVE VOLCANO?
WHAT DID NEW YORK CITY
LOOK LIKE 400 YEARS AGO?
DOES AIR POLLUTION
LOWER YOUR IQ?
BY STRIVING TO ANSWER
QUESTIONS LIKE THESE,
EARTH SCIENTISTS
HELP US UNDERSTAND
HOW OUR PLANET WORKS.
BUILDING ON A FOUNDATION
OF GEOLOGY, MATH,
PHYSICS AND CHEMISTRY,
THE EARTH SCIENCES
EXPLORE THE MAKE-UP AND
BEHAVIOR OF THE EARTH'S
MAIN ELEMENTS - THE
LAND, WATER AND AIR -
AND HOW THEY INTERACT
WITH EACH OTHER.
WITH A DEEPER
UNDERSTANDING
OF THE PLANET, SCIENTISTS
CAN MAKE PREDICTIONS
ABOUT HOW THE
EARTH WILL BEHAVE;
PREDICTIONS THAT CAN
SAVE LIVES AND CONSERVE
VALUABLE RESOURCES
FOR FUTURE GENERATIONS.
AFTER PREPARING A HOT
CUP OF TEA, MAYA TOLSTOY
IS READY TO PROBE THE
DEPTHS OF THE OCEAN.
SITTING AT HER COMPUTER
IS THE ONLY WAY FOR HER
TO STUDY UNDERWATER
VOLCANOES AND EARTHQUAKES.
NOBODY'S EVER SEEN THOSE
EARTHQUAKES BEFORE,
NOBODY KNOWS WHAT PROCESSES
ARE HAPPENING THERE,
DEEP IN THE OCEAN.
EVEN THOUGH YOU'RE VERY
OFTEN AT THE DESK,
IT'S LIKE EXPLORATION.
WITH TWO-THIRDS OF THE
PLANET COVERED BY WATER,
MARINE SEISMOLOGISTS HAVE
A LOT OF AREA TO COVER
WHILE STUDYING AND
MONITORING THE UNDERWATER
EARTHQUAKES
AND VOLCANOES
THAT SHAPE OUR
EARTH'S CRUST.
LEARNING MORE ABOUT THESE
POWERFUL EVENTS COULD LEAD
TO BETTER WARNINGS ABOUT
THEIR POTENTIAL EFFECTS
ON LAND - LIKE THE
DEVASTATION CAUSED BY
THE 2004
TSUNAMI IN ASIA.
MAYA IS ONE OF THE
SCIENTISTS WHO STUDIED
THE EARTHQUAKE THAT
CAUSED THE TSUNAMI.
SHE DISCOVERED HOW LARGE
THE QUAKE ACTUALLY WAS
BY ANALYZING THE SOUND WAVES
IT RELEASED INTO THE OCEAN.
IT'S A VERY EERIE
SOUND, OBVIOUSLY.
IT DEFINITELY SENDS
SHIVERS DOWN YOUR SPINE.
IT'S THE SOUND OF THE EARTH
RIPPING APART FOR THAT LONG.
IT WENT A DISTANCE
BASICALLY THE LENGTH
OF CALIFORNIA, 750 MILES,
IN EIGHT MINUTES.
BUT MAYA'S WORK ALSO
REQUIRES HER TO DO
PLENTY OF ACTUAL EXPLORING
- LIKE SAILING INTO
THE OPEN OCEAN TO DEPLOY
INSTRUMENTS THAT MONITOR
THE EARTH'S MOVEMENT
AND RECORD THE SOUND
OF THE UNDERWATER
EVENTS SHE STUDIES.
THE FIRST CRUISE I WENT ON
WAS A 10-DAY CRUISE
WHEN I WAS AN UNDERGRADUATE,
AND IT WAS JUST MAGICAL.
BEING FAR AWAY FROM LAND
AND THE SMELL OF THE OCEAN,
THERE'S A REALLY NICE
TEAM SPIRIT THAT DEVELOPS,
IT'S A GREAT ADVENTURE;
IT'S VERY EXCITING.
MAYA STILL GOES ON CRUISES
AT LEAST ONCE A YEAR,
THOUGH AS A SENIOR SCIENTIST
SHE HAS THE OPTION
OF SENDING OTHERS
IN HER PLACE
WHICH GIVES HER
MORE TIME AT HOME
WITH HER SON, JASON.
IT'S A LUXURY SHE'S EARNED
THROUGH HARD WORK,
BUT IT WASN'T
ALWAYS EASY.
MAYA RECALLS ONE
PARTICULAR RUN-IN
WITH HER SENIOR-YEAR
SCIENCE TEACHER.
HE HEARD ONE DAY THAT
I'D APPLIED FOR COLLEGE
TO DO PHYSICS, AND
HE SCREAMED AT ME
IN FRONT OF THE WHOLE
CLASS, AND HE SAID,
"YOU'RE NOT GONNA MAKE
IT PAST YOUR FIRST YEAR,
YOUR MOMMY'S NOT
GONNA BE THERE,
GIRLS DON'T
DO PHYSICS!"
JUST TOTALLY
HUMILIATED ME
IN FRONT OF
THE WHOLE CLASS.
BUT I WENT ANYWAY.
GETTING THROUGH THE ROAD
BLOCKS HAS BEEN WORTH IT.
MAYA IS NOW A TOP
SCIENTIST IN HER FIELD
AND SHE EVEN FINDS TIME TO
PURSUE HER OTHER PASSION:
ACTING.
I'M STILL IN THE SCREEN
ACTORS GUILD, SO I PAY
MY MEMBERSHIP CAUSE
I'M NOT GIVING THAT UP.
I ALSO DID A DOCUMENTARY
WITH JAMES CAMERON CALLED
ALIENS OF THE DEEP , AND
SO THAT WAS REALLY FUN.
IN FACT, SHE SAYS
THE TWO CAREERS
AREN'T ALL
THAT DIFFERENT.
ONE OF THE THINGS I REALLY
LIKED ABOUT ACTING WAS THE
TEAMWORK THAT GOES INTO
MAKING A PRODUCTION.
AND THAT'S ONE
OF THE THINGS
I REALLY ENJOY
ABOUT SCIENCE
AND ABOUT DOING THE
BIG SEA-GOING PROJECTS.
HER WORK BACK ON LAND -
ANALYZING PATTERNS
IN THE DATA FROM HER
SEA INSTRUMENTS -
CAN BE MORE LIKE TRYING
TO SOLVE A PUZZLE.
HER BACKGROUND
IN SCIENCE
HAS EQUIPPED HER
FOR THIS CHALLENGE,
AND ALSO PREPARED
HER FOR SO MUCH MORE.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT
SCIENCE TEACHES YOU IS
CRITICAL THINKING AND
LOGICAL THINKING AND
I THINK THAT THAT'S JUST
SUCH A VALUABLE SKILL
IN ANY ASPECT OF LIFE,
WHETHER YOU'RE LISTENING
TO AN AD FOR A CAR
OR WHETHER YOU'RE
LISTENING TO POLITICIANS,
IT'S ALWAYS
VALUABLE TO HAVE
GOOD CRITICAL
THINKING SKILLS.
MARINE SEISMOLOGISTS
SPEND A LOT OF TIME
OUT ON THE OCEAN AND
NEED A STRONG BACKGROUND
IN PHYSICS AND GEOLOGY.
RESEARCH AREAS INCLUDE
STUDYING TSUNAMIS
AND THE MOVEMENT OF
THE EARTH'S CRUST.
COMMERCIALLY,
MARINE SEISMOLOGISTS
CAN WORK IN THE
PETROCHEMICAL INDUSTRY.
RECENT GRADUATES CAN
EXPECT STARTING SALARIES
OF $36,000 A YEAR.
THE MEDIAN SALARY
FOR ALL SEISMOLOGISTS
IS OVER $67,000 A YEAR.
MOST PEOPLE HEAD FOR
SAFETY WHEN A HURRICANE
IS HEADED FOR LANDFALL,
BUT NOT STAN GOLDENBERG.
HE GETS INTO A PLANE
AND FLIES RIGHT INTO
THE EYE OF THE STORM.
STAN IS A
METEOROLOGIST
WITH THE HURRICANE
RESEARCH DIVISION
OF THE U.S.
GOVERNMENT'S NATIONAL
OCEANIC AND ATMOSPHERIC
ADMINISTRATION, OR NOAA.
AS ONE OF THEIR
"HURRICANE HUNTERS",
IT'S HIS JOB TO GO ON
RECONNAISANCE FLIGHTS
BEFORE AND DURING
HURRICANES.
IN NOAA'S SPECIALLY
EQUIPPED PLANES,
HE CAPTURES DATA THAT HELPS
ESTIMATE THE SIZE,
SPEED AND LIKELY
PATH OF THE STORM -
INFORMATION THAT'S
CRITICAL TO ASSESSING
THE NEED FOR WARNINGS
AND EVACUATIONS.
I'VE FLOWN THROUGH
THE EYE OF STORMS
OVER A HUNDRED
TIMES BEFORE THAT,
BUT IT'S NOTHING
IN THE AIR
LIKE IT IS
ON THE GROUND.
AND STAN WOULD KNOW.
IN 1992 HE AND HIS FAMILY
ENDURED THE FURY
OF HURRICANE ANDREW.
THE ROOF LIFTED OFF,
AND AS YOU CAN SEE,
WE HAVE NO HOUSE.
THANKING GOD, THANKING
GOD THAT WERE ALL SAFE.
HALLELUJAH.
AS ANDREW APPROACHED,
STAN'S WIFE GAVE BIRTH
TO THEIR DAUGHTER PEARL.
KNOWING THAT WIFE AND
BABY WOULD BE SAFE IN THE
HOSPITAL, STAN HEADED
TO THEIR MIAMI HOME
TO RIDE OUT THE STORM
WITH THEIR THREE SONS.
IT WAS A NIGHT THEY
ALMOST DIDN'T SURVIVE.
GOING THROUGH THAT
TERRIFYING EXPERIENCE
GIVES ME A LOT MORE
COMPASSION FOR OTHER
PEOPLE WHO MIGHT GO
THROUGH THESE THINGS
IN THE CARIBBEAN AND
OTHER PARTS OF THE U.S.,
AND I URGE PEOPLE:
THEY MUST TAKE
HURRICANES SERIOUSLY.
SINCE THEN STAN HAS BECOME
A LEADING ADVOCATE
FOR HURRICANE
PREPAREDNESS,
GIVING PUBLIC TALKS
ON WHAT TO DO.
ON THE RESEARCH SIDE, HE
SPECIALIZES IN FORECASTING
LONG-RANGE HURRICANE
ACTIVITY IN THE ATLANTIC.
IN 2001, STAN CO-AUTHORED
A LANDMARK SCIENTIFIC PAPER
PREDICTING THAT THE
NUMBER OF HURRICANES
MAKING LANDFALL
IN THE U.S.
WOULD INCREASE
DRAMATICALLY.
BY ANALYZING
WEATHER PATTERNS
AND CORRELATING THOSE
TO HURRICANE ACTIVITY,
STAN PREDICTED THE U.S.
WAS ENTERING A NATURAL
CYCLE OF INTENSIFIED
HURRICANE ACTIVITY.
I SAID, MAYBE THIS ISN'T
JUST A LITTLE SPIKE,
MAYBE THIS IS
A LONG-TERM TREND.
THE NEXT SEVERAL HURRICANE
SEASONS SEEMED TO CONFIRM
HIS FINDINGS, WITH
POWERFUL STORMS LIKE
DENNIS, RITA, WILMA
AND, OF COURSE, KATRINA.
NO FORECAST - SEASONAL
FORECAST OR LONG-TERM
FORECAST LIKE THIS - CAN
TELL ANY REGION WITH ANY
CERTAINTY THAT YOU'RE
GOING TO GET HIT ANY TIME
IN THE NEXT TWO OR
THREE YEARS OR SOMETHING.
BUT IT CERTAINLY SAYS
THERE'S MORE OF A
PROBABILITY OF IT - THERE'S
MORE ARROWS OUT THERE.
STAN'S CAREER IS PROOF
THAT IT'S NEVER TOO LATE
TO CHANGE YOUR MIND.
HE DROPPED OUT
OF JUNIOR COLLEGE
TO HITCHHIKE
ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
BUT HIS EXPERIENCES
CONVINCED HIM
TO RETURN HOME
AND TRY AGAIN.
HE ENDED UP IN A
METEOROLOGY PROGRAM
AND JOINED NOAA AFTER
COMPLETING HIS MASTER'S.
GIVEN THE DISASTER THAT
CAN STRIKE WHEN PEOPLE
FAIL TO EVACUATE,
IT'S EASY TO SEE WHY
STAN'S HURRICANE HUNTER
FLIGHTS ARE IMPORTANT.
BUT IT'S ALSO
IMPORTANT TO FIGURE OUT
WHEN NOT TO EVACUATE.
MOST PEOPLE DON'T
KNOW IT COSTS
ABOUT ONE MILLION
DOLLARS PER COASTLINE
OF POPULATED
AREA TO EVACUATE.
SO IF WE CAN REDUCE THE
WARNING AREA BY JUST
ONE MILE, AS FAR AS
THE AREA EVACUATED,
WE'VE PAID FOR OUR PROGRAM
FOR THE WHOLE YEAR.
AND ASIDE FROM GATHERING
SUCH CRITICAL DATA,
FLYING INTO THE EYE
OF A HURRICANE
HAS OTHER REWARDS.
IT'S SPECTACULAR BEAUTY.
AWESOME BEAUTY
FROM SEA TO SKY.
TALK ABOUT A 10-MILE-HIGH
WALL OF CLOUDS
CIRCLING AROUND YOU,
BUT CLEAR AT THE TOP,
CALM OCEAN
AT THE BOTTOM,
AND PEOPLE'S MOUTHS
USUALLY DROP OPEN
EVEN IF YOU'VE BEEN IN
THERE AGAIN AND AGAIN.
METEOROLOGISTS NEED
A FOUNDATION IN MATH
AND PHYSICS, SOME KNOWLEDGE
OF COMPUTER PROGRAMMING,
AND IN SOME CASES, AN
UNDERSTANDING OF CHEMISTRY.
TELEVISION WEATHER
FORECASTERS MAY GET
ALL THE GLORY, BUT
THOSE GIGS ARE RARE.
MOST JOBS ARE WITHIN
FEDERAL AGENCIES, AND
THERE ARE ALSO
METEOROLOGY JOBS IN THE
OIL, AERONAUTICS AND
INSURANCE INDUSTRIES.
IN FEDERAL AGENCIES,
ENTRY-LEVEL PAY FOR
COLLEGE GRADUATES IS
ABOUT $28,000 A YEAR.
THE MEDIAN ANNUAL SALARY
FOR ALL METEOROLOGISTS
IS ABOUT $70,000.
HE MAY BE SAFE AND
SOUND IN HIS LAB TODAY,
BUT EARLY IN HIS CAREER
WHILE DOING RESEARCH
AT MOUNT
ETNA IN ITALY,
VOLCANOLOGIST
JAKE LOWENSTERN
LEARNED A
VALUABLE LESSON:
CHECK THE DAILY
SEISMIC RECORDS
BEFORE YOU HEAD UP THE
SIDE OF AN ACTIVE VOLCANO.
JAKE AND HIS GUIDE
WERE PREPARING
TO TAKE SAMPLES
OF NEW LAVA FLOW
WHEN THE SITUATION
SUDDENLY TURNED DANGEROUS.
THEY HAD TO BEAT A HASTY
RETREAT IN THE DARK
ACROSS A WEEK-OLD
MOLTEN LAVA FLOW.
HAD WE KNOWN MORE, WE
WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN THERE.
AND WE WERE DODGING BOMBS
OF LAVA THAT WERE SHOOTING
INTO THE SKY AND
FALLING ALL AROUND US.
IT WAS A TRULY
TERRIFYING EXPERIENCE
- NOT ONE THAT I HOPE
TO EVER HAVE AGAIN,
BUT ONE FROM WHICH
I LEARNED A LOT.
BUT HANDS-ON WORK IN THE
FIELD IS JUST WHAT JAKE
WAS LOOKING FOR WHEN HE
CHOSE GEOLOGY AS A CAREER.
TODAY, JAKE READS
SEISMIC RECORDS
LIKE MOST OF US READ
THE LOCAL PAPER.
AS A RESEARCH
GEOLOGIST AT THE U.S.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY AND THE
SCIENTIST-IN-CHARGE OF THE
YELLOWSTONE VOLCANO
OBSERVATORY, HE HEADS UP A
TEAM OF SCIENTISTS AND
RESEARCHERS THAT MONITORS
VOLCANIC ACTIVITY IN
THE NATIONAL PARK.
YELLOWSTONE IS HOME TO
ONE OF THE COUNTRY'S
MOST ACTIVE CALDERAS: A
VOLCANO THAT HAS COLLAPSED
INTO THE GROUND.
I GET TO WALK AROUND
THE VOLCANOES,
I STUDY THE GASES THAT
COME OUT OF THE GROUND,
AND I GET TO WORK ON HOT
SPRINGS AND WATCH MAGMA
AND LAVA COMING OUT OF
THE GROUND, AND IT'S
A PRETTY TREMENDOUS
THING TO GET TO DO.
AFTER GRADUATING FROM
COLLEGE WITH A BACHELOR'S
DEGREE IN GEOLOGY, JAKE
SPENT A YEAR IN SICILY
DOING RESEARCH AT MOUNT
ETNA, ONE OF THE WORLD'S
MOST FAMOUS
ACTIVE VOLCANOES.
IT WAS A GREAT YEAR FOR
ME PERSONALLY AND AS A
SCIENTIST LEARNING WHAT
HAPPENS ON A BIG VOLCANO
THAT'S SURROUNDED
BY CITIES.
MUCH OF JAKE'S RESEARCH
TODAY IS INFLUENCED
BY THAT EXPERIENCE.
WHILE MANY VOLCANOLOGISTS
CONCENTRATE ON MAPPING
VOLCANOS AND RESEARCHING
THEIR HISTORY,
JAKE FOCUSES ON MONITORING
VOLCANIC ACTIVITY.
HE COLLECTS AND MEASURES
GASES EMANATING
FROM VOLCANIC AREAS,
AND USES THE DATA
TO FORECAST
POTENTIAL ERUPTIONS.
WHILE IT'S IMPOSSIBLE TO
PREDICT WITH CERTAINTY
WHAT VOLCANOES
WILL DO,
THEY DO OFFER CLUES DAYS,
WEEKS OR EVEN MONTHS
BEFORE MAGMA ACTUALLY
MAKES IT TO THE SURFACE.
GENERALLY BEFORE ANY KIND
OF VOLCANIC ERUPTION OCCURS
THE VOLCANO SENDS OUT
SIGNALS THAT WE CAN READ
TO KNOW THAT
SOMETHING IS HAPPENING,
THAT SOMETHING
NEEDS CLOSER WATCHING.
AND SO THOSE ARE THE SORTS
OF THINGS THAT WE DO
AS VOLCANO
OBSERVATORIES
TO PREPARE FOR
COMING ERUPTIONS.
AN AVID WRITER, JAKE
HAS ALSO SERVED AS
A CONSULTANT ON SEVERAL
DOCUMENTARIES AND FILMS.
HE TRAVELS ABOUT TWO
MONTHS OUT OF THE YEAR,
EXPLORING THE
YELLOWSTONE CALDERA
AND VISITING VOLCANOES
AROUND THE WORLD.
A RECENT TRIP TOOK HIM TO
ITALY'S PHLEGRAEN FIELDS,
WHERE HE WAS AMAZED BY
HOW AN ENTIRE COMMUNITY
EXISTS WITHIN THE
VOLCANIC SYSTEM.
I'VE BEEN TO A LOT OF
DIFFERENT COUNTRIES,
I'VE BEEN TO SOME OF THE
HIGHEST PLACES ON EARTH
AND SOME OF THE
DEEPEST VALLEYS
RICHEST COUNTRIES
AND SOME OF THE POOREST
PLACES ON EARTH.
I'VE JUST BEEN ABLE TO
SEE A LOT AND LEARN A LOT
ABOUT WHAT HAPPENS HERE
AND IN OTHER PLACES
BESIDES WHERE I LIVE, SO
IT'S ALWAYS AN EDUCATION;
IT'S SOMETHING
THAT I LOVE TO DO.
BUT EVEN WITH ALL THE
TRAVEL, FIELD WORK
AND HANDS-ON EXPERIENCES,
JAKE'S GREATEST SATISFACTION
COMES FROM SHARING THE
RESULTS OF HIS RESEARCH -
WRITING CLEAR, CONCISE PAPERS
THAT ADD TO OUR KNOWLEDGE
OF VOLCANOES AND THEIR
EFFECT ON THE EARTH.
THIS IS WHERE WE LIVE;
IT'S OUR HOME.
AND IF WE DON'T
UNDERSTAND HOW IT WORKS
WE'RE GOING TO HAVE A
TOUGH TIME LIVING HERE
AND SURVIVING HERE ON THIS
PLANET IN THE LONG RUN.
THE STUDY OF VOLCANOS
REQUIRES SPATIAL ANALYSIS
AND VISUAL MEMORY SKILLS.
A SOLID FOUNDATION IN
GEOLOGY AND MATH IS ESSENTIAL.
VOLCANOLOGY IS A
SPECIALIZED FIELD
WITH MOST JOBS IN
ACADEMIA OR GOVERNMENT.
OPTIONS FOR OTHER TYPES OF
GEOLOGISTS INCLUDE URBAN
PLANNING, OIL EXPLORATION,
MINING AND MORE.
THE MEDIAN ANNUAL SALARY
FOR ALL GEOSCIENTISTS
IS AROUND $69,000.
WITHIN THE GOVERNMENT
GEOLOGISTS AVERAGE OVER
$83,000 A YEAR.
CARS, FACTORIES,
POWER PLANTS -
SOURCES OF POLLUTION
ARE EVERYWHERE.
BUT HOW MUCH DO POLLUTANTS
ACTUALLY AFFECT OUR HEALTH?
ENVIRONMENTAL
HEALTH SCIENTISTS
LIKE FREDERICA PERERA
ANSWER THAT QUESTION
BY DISCOVERING
THE CONNECTIONS
BETWEEN TOXINS
AND DISEASE.
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT
COMMON URBAN POLLUTANTS
FROM COMBUSTION SOURCES,
CARS, BUSES, TRUCKS,
THE BURNING OF ORGANIC
MATERIAL FOR POWER,
FOR HEAT, SO, WE GENERATE
A LOT OF THESE POLLUTANTS
LOCALLY RIGHT HERE
OUT ON OUR STREETS.
THOUGH SHE'S AN EXPERT
IN HER FIELD NOW,
FREDERICA DIDN'T
ALWAYS PLAN ON
GOING INTO
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH.
AFTER GRADUATING
FROM COLLEGE
WITH A LIBERAL
ARTS DEGREE,
FREDERICA TOOK TIME
TO RAISE A FAMILY.
WHILE CONSIDERING
GRADUATE SCHOOL,
A PHOTO EXHIBIT
SHE SAW IN NEW YORK
CHANGED THE
COURSE OF HER LIFE.
IT SHOWED THESE
PHOTOGRAPHS OF CHILDREN
WHO HAD BEEN
HARMED BECAUSE
THEIR MOTHERS ATE FISH
FROM THE POLLUTED BAY.
I WAS VERY STRUCK BY THIS
AND BEGAN THINKING ABOUT
HOW VERY SENSITIVE THIS
STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT IS
AND THAT CONCERNED ME
BECAUSE AT THE TIME
I ACTUALLY HAD YOUNG
CHILDREN MYSELF.
IN A DRAMATIC SHIFT,
FREDERICA DECIDED TO
BECOME A RESEARCH
SCIENTIST, FOCUSED
MAINLY ON THE EFFECTS
OF AIRBORNE POLLUTANTS.
AS A PHD STUDENT SHE
PIONEERED THE USE OF
NEW METHODS FOR MEASURING
THE AMOUNT OF DAMAGE
CERTAIN
TOXIC POLLUTANTS
ACTUALLY CAUSE
TO OUR DNA.
HER FINDINGS MIGHT LEAD
TO BROAD IMPROVEMENTS
IN PUBLIC POLICY.
I BEGAN TO SEE THAT WE
COULD DETECT THIS KIND OF
DAMAGE IN PEOPLE WHO
WERE PERFECTLY HEALTHY
AND WEREN'T JUST
CASES WITH DISEASE.
AND THIS DAMAGE WAS
A CHANGE IN DNA,
AN ACTUAL ALTERATION IN
THE GENETIC MATERIAL
AS A RESULT OF THIS
POLLUTANT EXPOSURE.
SHE DISCOVERED THAT
TOXINS CAN EVEN AFFECT
AN UNBORN FETUS.
THIS LED FREDERICA TO LAUNCH
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES
INVOLVING THOUSANDS
OF MOTHERS AND CHILDREN
TO TRACK THE IMPACT
OF THIS EXPOSURE.
THE CHILDREN WHO HAD MORE
EXPOSURE IN THE WOMB
TO THESE COMBUSTION-RELATED
AIR POLLUTANTS
SCORED SIGNIFICANTLY
LOWER ON THE TESTS
FOR MENTAL DEVELOPMENT
AND WERE MORE THAN TWICE,
ALMOST THREE TIMES
AS LIKELY TO BE
DEVELOPMENTALLY DELAYED.
FREDERICA CONTINUES TO
TRAVEL AROUND THE WORLD
TO MEET WITH HER
INTERNATIONAL COLLEAGUES.
AS A TENURED PROFESSOR,
SHE ALSO SPENDS A LOT
OF TIME APPLYING FOR
FUNDING, AND SHE TEACHES.
BUT FOR FREDERICA, THE
MOST SATISFYING THING
ABOUT HER WORK IS
THE REAL IMPACT
IT CAN HAVE ON
PEOPLE'S LIVES.
WE DON'T JUST PUBLISH
OUR RESULTS AND SAY
THAT'S AN
IMPORTANT FINDING,
BUT WE REACH OUT TO
THE PARTICIPANTS
IN THE STUDY AND THE
FAMILIES TO TELL THEM
WHAT THEY CAN DO TO
PROTECT THEIR CHILDREN.
AND SHE HOPES THAT
HER WORK WILL CAUSE
LASTING CHANGES IN
ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY.
THERE ARE WAYS TO CURB
AND SHARPLY REDUCE
THESE POLLUTANTS
SINCE THEY ARE
EMITTED FROM BURNING
OF FOSSIL FUELS.
WE CAN HAVE MUCH
MORE EFFICIENT
ENERGY TECHNOLOGIES.
WE CAN HAVE CLEANER CARS
AND TRUCKS AND BUSES.
FOR EXAMPLE, WE
CAN USE HYBRIDS
AND CLEAN
AIR TECHNOLOGY.
AND NOT ONLY DOES SHE
HAVE THE POTENTIAL
TO TOUCH THE LIVES OF
THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE,
SHE ALSO LOVES HER JOB.
SCIENCE IS LIKE...
IT'S DETECTIVE WORK.
AND IT IS INTELLECTUALLY
VERY, VERY EXCITING.
BUT WORKING WITH
COMMITTED PEOPLE
HAS BEEN ANOTHER JOY -
COMMITTED AND SMART PEOPLE
WHO CARE ABOUT
FINDING THE ANSWERS
TO HOW WE CAN BETTER
PREVENT DISEASE.
THAT'S BEEN A WONDERFUL
ODYSSEY FOR ME.
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH
SCIENTISTS NEED TO BE
GOOD AT COMMUNICATING,
WORKING WITH DIVERSE
GROUPS OF PEOPLE,
AND MAKING ABSTRACT
CONNECTIONS.
RESEARCHERS IN THIS
FIELD PICK SPECIALTIES
LIKE HAZARDOUS WASTE, FOOD
PROTECTION, WATER QUALITY,
OR RADIATION,
AND OFTEN WORK CLOSELY
WITH GOVERNMENT AGENCIES.
THE MEDIAN SALARY FOR ALL
ENVIRONMENTAL SCIENTISTS
IS OVER $53,000
WITH A RANGE FROM
THE LOW $30'S TO
THE HIGH $80'S.
ERIC SANDERSON LOOKS
AROUND MANHATTAN
AND SEES MORE THAN
JUST THE MADDING CROWD
AMONG THE SKYSCRAPERS.
A LANDSCAPE ECOLOGIST WITH
THE WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
SOCIETY, ERIC SEES
BLACK BEARS, COUGARS,
AND BEAVERS ROVING
AMONG STREAMS, WETLANDS
AND ROLLING HILLS.
WHAT ERIC SEES IS NOT
MANHATTAN, BUT MANNAHATTA
- THE ISLAND'S ORIGINAL
NATIVE AMERICAN NAME.
BY TAKING DATA FROM
HISTORICAL MAPS,
LAND SURVEYS AND
CORRESPONDENCE
AND ENTERING IT
INTO GEOGRAPHIC
INFORMATION SYSTEMS,
HE DEVELOPED A MODEL
OF WHAT "THE CITY THAT
NEVER SLEEPS" LOOKED LIKE
WHEN IT WAS A
LUSH WILDERNESS
INSTEAD OF A
CONCRETE JUNGLE.
BY RELATING THE
PLACES WE KNOW TODAY
- WHAT'S AT 59TH STREET
AND FIFTH AVENUE TODAY -
TO WHAT IT WAS 400
YEARS AGO, WE START TO
UNDERSTAND WHY WILDNESS
IS IMPORTANT TO US.
PEOPLE REALLY
GET INTO IT
BECAUSE IT'S THEIR
OWN BACKYARD.
PEOPLE SEE A STREAM THAT
GOES DOWN FIFTH AVENUE
AND IT SO
BLOWS THEIR MIND -
HOW DO YOU RECONCILE
THOSE TWO THINGS?
ERIC'S "MANNAHATTA
PROJECT" IS DRIVEN BY
HIS OVERARCHING GOAL
OF CONSERVATION.
AS A LANDSCAPE ECOLOGIST,
HE STUDIES HOW ECOSYSTEMS
INTERACT ON
A BROAD SCALE
AND HOW HUMAN POPULATIONS
IMPACT THE ENVIRONMENT.
MOST OF MY WORK AT THE
WILDLIFE CONSERVATION
SOCIETY IS ABOUT SAVING
WILDLIFE IN WILD PLACES
ALL AROUND THE WORLD.
WE TRY AND HELP
LOCAL COMMUNITIES
UNDERSTAND WHAT IT MEANS
TO LIVE WITH WILDLIFE
AND FIND SOLUTIONS FOR
THEM TO LIVE WITH WILDLIFE.
ONE OF HIS PROJECTS MAPPED
THE HUMAN FOOTPRINT
ON A GLOBAL SCALE.
ERIC COMBINED INFORMATION
LIKE POPULATION DENSITY,
ROADS, LAND USE, AND
LIGHTS VISIBLE FROM A
SATELLITE AT NIGHT, AND
WAS ABLE TO CONCLUDE THAT
HUMANS INFLUENCE 83% OF
THE EARTH'S LAND SURFACE.
WHEN HE CONFINED THE
MAP TO AREAS SUITABLE
FOR FARMING, THE
NUMBER GREW TO 98%.
THE TOUGH PART IS
WHAT TO DO NEXT.
STATISTICS LIKE THAT
FUEL ERIC'S INTEREST
IN CONSERVATION,
BUT CAN ALSO
MAKE HIM THE
BEARER OF BAD NEWS.
SCIENTISTS OFTEN SAY HARD
THINGS AND MEAN THINGS
AND THINGS THAT
ARE HARD TO HEAR
ABOUT WHAT'S HAPPENING
TO THE ENVIRONMENT,
AND WHAT I WANT
PEOPLE TO DO
IS UNDERSTAND WHY
WE CARE SO MUCH.
ERIC ATTRIBUTES HIS
PASSION TO CHILDHOOD
SUMMERS SPENT AT HIS
GRANDMOTHER'S CABIN
DEEP IN THE
COLORADO WILDERNESS,
WHERE HE AND HIS COUSINS
ROAMED FREE IN THE WOODS.
HE WAS ALSO INSPIRED BY A
222-MILE BACKPACKING TRIP
HE TOOK WITH FRIENDS IN
HIS NATIVE CALIFORNIA.
TO THIS DAY HE
RECALLS THIS AS BEING
THE FIRST TIME HE EVER
FELT SELF-SUFFICIENT
AND TRULY CONTENT.
BUT ERIC STUDIED
BIOCHEMISTRY
AND FIRST WENT TO WORK
FOR A CHEMICAL COMPANY.
AFTER A FEW YEARS HE
RECALLED HIS FATHER'S REGRET
AT GIVING UP ON HIS FORESTRY
CAREER TO GO INTO BUSINESS.
ERIC CHANGED HIS FOCUS, GOT
A PHD IN LANDSCAPE ECOLOGY,
AND JOINED
THE WCS IN 1998.
OUR LIVES ARE SO BUSY
AND SO FULL WITH THINGS
THAT WE FORGET HOW
IMPORTANT NATURE IS TO US.
HIS WORK WITH THE WCS
OFTEN INCLUDES TRAVELING
TO EXOTIC LOCATIONS - LIKE
MONGOLIA AND TANZANIA.
BACK IN NEW YORK, A
TYPICAL DAY COULD INCLUDE
WORKING ON BISON RECOVERY,
RESEARCHING THE WILDLIFE
POPULATION ON THE
COAST OF PATAGONIA,
AND UPDATING THE
MANNAHATTA PROJECT.
WE HOPE TO HAVE A THOUSAND
TO TWO THOUSAND LAYERS
- ONE FOR EVERY SPECIES -
EVERY VERTEBRATE SPECIES
THAT LIVED ON MANHATTAN.
BY SHOWING HOW MUCH THINGS
HAVE CHANGED IN 400 YEARS,
HE HOPES TO HELP
PEOPLE REALIZE THAT
THE WAY WE TREAT
OUR LANDSCAPE TODAY
HAS AN IMPACT ON
FUTURE GENERATIONS.
THE QUESTION IS WHAT
IS MANHATTAN GOING TO
LOOK LIKE 200
YEARS FROM NOW?
IS IT GOING TO BE
TALLER AND TALLER
AND TALLER BUILDINGS?
OR ARE WE GOING TO
LEAVE SOME PLACES
WHERE NATURE CAN
THRIVE AND SUPPORT US?
THAT'S THE QUESTION
I'M TRYING TO ASK,
AND TO HELP PEOPLE
REALIZE THAT PEOPLE
200 YEARS, 400
YEARS FROM NOW
INHERIT THE CONSEQUENCES
OF OUR CHOICES.
KEY SKILLS IN LANDSCAPE
ECOLOGY INCLUDE
SYNTHESIZING
LOTS OF DATA,
KNOWLEDGE OF GEOGRAPHY AND
COMPUTER SCIENCE, AND
UNDERSTANDING HOW POLITICS
INFLUENCES CONSERVATION.
OTHER ECOLOGY CAREER PATHS
INCLUDE CONSERVATION,
LAND USE AND MANAGEMENT,
OR SPECIALIZING
IN A PARTICULAR
TYPE OF ECOSYSTEM.
ECOLOGISTS IN ACADEMICS
AVERAGE $60,000 A YEAR,
WHILE THOSE
OUTSIDE ACADEMICS
AVERAGE $71,000 ANNUALLY.
FROM GEOLOGY
TO METEOROLOGY,
OCEANOGRAPHY TO ECOLOGY,
A CAREER IN EARTH SCIENCES
IS A CAREER OF EXPLORATION,
LEADING TO DISCOVERIES
THAT CAN CONNECT THE
PRESENT TO THE PAST
AND CARVE A PATH
TO THE FUTURE.
YOUR JOURNEY IN THE EARTH
SCIENCES COULD WIND FROM
THE TOPS OF MOUNTAINS TO
THE DEPTHS OF THE OCEANS,
THROUGH URBAN CITYSCAPES
OR REMOTE LANDSCAPES,
BUT IT WILL CERTAINLY
START WITH A COMMITMENT
TO EDUCATION.
WITH A BACHELOR'S
DEGREE, YOU CAN TEACH,
WORK AS A LAB TECHNICIAN
OR FIELD RESEARCHER,
OR TAKE A JOB IN AN INDUSTRY
SUCH AS MINING OR OIL.
WITH A MASTER'S DEGREE,
YOU CAN LEAD RESEARCH
IN GOVERNMENT OR
INDUSTRY LABS.
GRADUATE STUDY IN ANOTHER
AREA COULD LAUNCH A CAREER
IN POLICY, LAW,
OR JOURNALISM.
GETTING A PHD TAKES
FIVE TO SEVEN YEARS,
THOUGH MOST UNIVERSITIES
WILL PAY YOUR WAY
AND REQUIRES ANOTHER
TWO TO FOUR YEARS
OF PAID
POSTDOCTORAL WORK.
FOR PHD'S THE
SKY'S THE LIMIT.
AND WHETHER YOU
STUDY ICY GLACIERS
OR MOLTEN
LAVA FLOWS;
THE EYE OF THE STORM OR
THE CORE OF THE PLANET,
YOU MAY JUST UNCOVER
LIFE-SAVING INFORMATION
ALONG THE WAY.